welcome everybody to another night sky
news with me astrophysicist dr. Becky
Smethurst what a month it has been for
both astronomy research and for
stargazing so without any further ado
let's just dive right into this
all right let's start with the thing
that everybody it's been talking about
and that is comet NEOWISE little bit
over there so we've not been able to
spot it here yet little did she know
that she'd spotted that very same night
hey everybody editing Becky just jumping
in here quickly
now I filmed all this footage before I'd
even been able to see the comet myself
but that very night it was clear enough
I managed to go out and find it I got a
little bit overexcited social media
about it but it was my very first
comment so I was on such a high anyway
if you want to spot it yourself here's
what you need to do you need to find the
plow Big Dipper
Ursa Major whatever you call it and you
need to sort of go down towards the
horizon from there and then either sort
of slightly right or slightly left
depending first of all where you are in
the world and also depending when in
July you're actually trying to spot this
so what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna put a
link in the description that you can put
in your specific location and then a
specific day and time and then it will
show you where the comet is in relation
to the plow at or at the Big Dipper now
I'm gonna be able to spot it here in the
south of the UK at around about half
midnight and I could actually see it
with my naked eye as well despite the
fact that in the exact same direction
was just this giant bright street lamp
as well to the naked eye it looks like a
sort of fuzzy star with a fuzzy smudge
above it now my eyesight is pretty good
and okay yeah I was in the suburbs but I
still did have quite a bit of light
pollution around it will depend on your
sky conditions humidity your altitude
you know how clear it is how the light
pollution is around you and also how
good your eyesight is whether you'll be
able to see it with the naked eye I
managed to be able to confirm that what
I was looking at was actually the comet
just using my phone so you used a normal
just three second night mode shot with
my iPhone 11 just pointed it roughly in
the right direction towards the plow to
confirm oh yeah that fuzzy
saying is actually comment me aways now
if you have binoculars that's another
way you could confirm that what you
think is that fuzzy patch in the sky is
actually comment near white and it will
probably make it look even more
spectacular I haven't seen it through
binoculars that because somehow we don't
have any here in the house but I've got
a family member coming at the weekend
that fingers crossed it's gonna bring
down some binoculars so I'll share on my
social media my reaction to seeing it
through binoculars and how it compares
to it sort of naked eye and with your
phone but for now here's what I got with
a 30 second exposure on my iPhone 11
just propped up outside on the garden
table you can spot the plow in the top
left there as well the comparison here's
one of my subscribers Adams pink
captured with this Google pixel 3 which
had a 58 millimeter lens from moment
attached to it as well it's really
lovely to see so thanks for setting that
in Adam we also broke out our chunky
DSLR here as well which is a Nikon with
a 35 millimeter lens and we managed to
snap these beauties literally with it on
a tripod precariously balanced pointing
out of the spare bedroom window I might
play around with trying to stack some of
the images we took this week so look out
for those again on my social media it is
set to get brighter as it gets closer to
Earth its closest past is gonna be on
Wednesday the 22nd of July which is the
day this video comes out so fingers
crossed for clear skies everybody all
right back to filming baking so as a
reminder a comment is a rocky icy body
in the solar system that orbits the Sun
but instead of on sort of a roughly
round but ever so slightly oval shape
like what the Earth's orbit is this is
on a really elongated oval shape so
it'll go really far away from the Sun in
sort of the far reaches of the solar
system and sort of getting credibly cold
and freeze out as it does and then when
it gets back towards the Sun all the ice
that's frozen out in the far reaches
will start to melt that releases you
know gas and dust from the inside of the
comet that then sort of evaporates and
forms this very thin atmosphere around
the comet radiation from the Sun then
impacts on that thin atmosphere and
since its streaming away from the Sun in
a very long
which is what makes it look so
spectacular to us from Earth now the
other two comments this year that people
had high hopes that they would become
very visible in the night sky to us were
common Atlas and comet Swan they
actually broke up as they got to closest
on with all that sort of melting and
outgassing it can sometimes break up
comments and so people were quite
disappointed when that happened but
NEOWISE has swooped in to save the day
or save the year at this point because
universe knows means something good to
come out of 2020 now all of that dust
and gas debris left behind by a comment
as it orbits the Sun is what causes
meteor showers when the Earth passes
through that sort of debris trail that
the comet leaves behind and Andrew so
happens that we've been passing the
debris trail of two of the comets whilst
comet NEOWISE is gonna be visible in the
sky and so that's gonna cause two very
popular meteor showers there Delta ik
where it's meteor shower at the end of
July and then the Perseids meteor shower
mid-august time and the Perseid meteor
shower is just hands down the best
meteor shower of the year there's
something like 16 meteors per hour
during its peak which this year is gonna
be 12th of august now the Delta require
it's probably more like 15 to 20 meteors
per hour so not quite as spectacular as
the persons but Delta Aquarids
really only be more for the southern
hemisphere where the persons is really
going to be for the northern hemisphere
now wherever you are in the world sort
of in late July if you do see a meteor
it's much more likely that it's come
from Delta Aquarids than the persons
because the delt records you really can
see from wherever you are on the globe
it's just southern hemisphere you're
much more likely to spot them for those
in the northern hemisphere Perseid
should put on a great show the only
problem is that the moon is still up
during the peak of the meteor shower and
the 12th of August so it's probably
gonna be best just after that when
they'll be slightly less meteors per
hour but you're not contending with the
moon so you're much more likely to spot
more of them because you'll see the
fainter ones and not just the brighter
ones that weren't you know blown out by
the way of the moon to spot the Perseids
you need to find Cassiopeia or the W
another very famous at Khan
halation and basically look anywhere
else in the sky but that and then you
should be able to spot the meteors which
appear to streak away from the area of
the sky near Cassiopeia all right let's
switch gears now from stargazing or
comet or meteor gazing this one and
let's talk about all the space news and
that's been happening
now I don't know if anybody else noticed
this this month but there was so many
space related news stories that came out
in the past couple weeks and I ended up
with a list of nine stories to cover
which is just absolutely crazy so to
save my own scientific research from
just getting snowed under by video
editing next week what I'm gonna do is
actually talk about some of the stories
over on my Instagram account so if you
want to know more about the possible
giant star spots on Betelgeuse that
could explain its strange dimming from
last year and this white dwarf that
might have been ejected from a failed
supernova explosion then head over to my
Instagram I'll put them on stories just
as this video goes live as well and then
I'll save them in a highlight if you're
watching it later down the line but if
you're interested in those go over and
check out my Instagram for that so
continuing the tradition of styling this
news segment with just something pretty
thin look at how have you guys seen this
incredible video that was released by
NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory so as
of June 2020 the SDO has been taking a
picture of the Sun every three-quarters
of a second for a decade that's 425
million high-resolution images of the
Sun or 20 million gigabytes of data over
the past ten years so they released a
time-lapse of that data compressing ten
years down into a single hour it's just
incredible to look at how the Sun not
only changes on a day-to-day basis
but also on a yearly basis as well now
there's gonna be a lot more images and
results being released about the Sun in
the next coming years because we've got
NASA's Parker saw the probe and ESA's
solar orbiter both on their way to orbit
and study the Sun in great great detail
so unlike the Solar Dynamics Observatory
which is about half the distance between
the earth and the Sun is where it orbits
these are gonna be within the orbit of
mercury at their closest approaches so
they're going to be able to see the Sun
in great detail so actually the very
first pictures from ESA's solar orbiter
were released this month and they showed
the surface of the Sun in unlike any
tell that anyone has seen before and
what they revealed was these structures
on the surface that we've never seen
before these tiny little sort of almost
like solar flares sort of massive ones
that we see from Earth that you know end
up causing our aurora but like in
miniature version they've been dug sort
of like campfires by the solar orbiter
team which is an analogy that I love
what's great though about these little
miniatures all of their campfire things
is that they could possibly be an
explanation for why the Sun's corona
it's very very sort of thin atmosphere
that extends a lot further than sort of
what you would classes amongst the
surface of the Sun is way way hotter
than the actual surfacing they could
sort of be the reason why that Corona
has been heated to such high
temperatures that sort of the may be
tentative hypothesis at the minute
though they're gonna be working on that
in the next coming years and so when
there is anything more concrete you know
I'll let you know on this channel so the
next big piece of news that we need to
talk about is that the LIGO and Virgo
collaboration teams detected
gravitational waves from merger of two
objects one of those objects was a 23
ish times the mass of the Sun black hole
the other object was something else that
something else was an object that was
2.6 times the mass of the Sun that means
that it is either the heaviest neutron
star ever detected or the lightest black
hole ever detected the previous record
orders for that the heaviest neutron
star was 2.5 times the mass of the Sun
which we've talked about on a previous
night sky news video on this channel the
lightest black hole ever discovered or
known as before was 5 times the mass of
the Sun and so that difference sort of
from the 2.5 times the master zone and
the 5 times the mass the Sun going from
neutron star to black hole has been
called the very original mass gap and
it's one of those things that we can't
really explain so I always like to
describe a neutron star as like in the
Pikachu to a black holes right you right
if you keep adding more and more
math to a neutron star it will evolve
because the force exerted by gravity
that's pushing on those neutrons that
are already is tightly packed as they
can go
becomes too much and the whole thing
cuts us down into a black hole now the
point though at which that happens is
not very well understood jeez previous
models put it at about two point one six
times the mass of the Sun but and they
found that 2.5 times the mass the Sun
neutron star not long ago so then the
models were revised based on that new
observation and they came up with a new
number of 2.6 times the mass of the Sun
which is the mass of the object they
found here
now other neutron star mergers that lag
when Virgo have detected have also given
off a flash of light of electromagnetic
waves at the same time that we've been
able to detect with telescopes on earth
this one didn't and there could be a
couple of reasons for why it didn't the
first one being that it was two black
holes and it was the smallest black hole
at 2.6 times the mass that's on this
merged with the normal one that like on
Vega tend to find it 23 times the mass
of the Sun that could be one hypothesis
if it's a neutron star though then you
could explain the lack of light just
from the fact that it is actually six
times further away than the other
sources that they've detected and
therefore the light from it might be
much fainter and so we've just not to
text it or that the black hole sort of
swallowed the neutron star hole and
therefore that's why you haven't got any
light from it and we don't know which of
those sort of three hypothesis is right
yet which is why sort of people are
referring to this as you know the merger
of a black hole with something else like
another object that could be a black
hole or could be a neutron star the hope
is that like oh and Virgo will continue
to detect mergers just like this of
things right on that mass limit and that
should give us a much better idea of
what is going on in terms of like
statistics and population whether you
know some get my flashes some don't and
maybe we can work something out from
that so I guess it's just a waiting game
while we wait for like over go to maybe
checked more of these but you know when
they do you'll find out right here so
sticking on this topic of black holes a
typical way that a black hole is made is
through a supernova so when it's Starly
20 times the mass of the Sun or more
runs out of hydrogen fuel to burn in the
place where it's actually hot enough for
nuclear fusion to happen in the core and
then what happens is that those outer
layers then collapse inwards they
rebound and get thrown back out into
space and this huge sort of explosion
whereas the central core will then
collapse down into a black hole that's
somewhere in this or mass cap range of
like two point five to five ish times
the mass of the Sun if your star isn't
big enough to give you a black hole if
it's not 20 times the mass of Sun or
more than you're probably gonna get a
neutron star something like this one
you'll get a white dwarf
instead I guess sticking to the Pokemon
analogy a white dwarf would be a Pichu
now that's the typical way we think that
holes are formed but astronomers this
month have found evidence of a massive
star that has just completely
disappeared
perhaps skipping the supernova entirely
and just directly collapsing all of it
down into a black hole this work was
from Allanon carburators who found that
in the total light output by the little
dwarf galaxies they were studying the
signatures of the most massive luminous
star had disappeared and those
signatures were very easy to spot it
really did dominate the light this dye
was outgassing it was very variable it
wasn't a very stable star so the
disappearance of those signatures could
mean one of two things right either the
star has got its life together is no
longer unstable and variable and it's
sort of settled back down so that it's
no longer dominating the way of that
dwarf galaxy other thing that could have
happened is that it was reaching the end
of its life hence why it was so unstable
and variable but somehow it skipped the
supernova process entirely and the whole
thing collapsed down into a black hole
that might sound quite far-fetched but
we have actually seen something like
that happen before back in 2015
astronomers found a star in our own
galaxies that just completely
disappeared it was there in one image
not there in the next so that discovery
back in 2015 lends a lot of support to
this hypothesis that this star could
also have done the same thing directly
collapsed into a black hole what amazes
me is that in such a short space of time
we found two candidate stars that could
have done this you know five years
astronomically speaking is nothing right
which might suggest that that process of
a star collapsing down into a black hole
at the end of its life is maybe not as
rare as we first thought and there is
possibly a way of making a black hole
that is actually 2030 times the mass of
the Sun directly from a star rather than
making something from just the core of
the star that's maybe three times the
mass of the Sun and maybe that would
explain you know the black holes that
LIGO and Virgo have been detecting on
average that are around about that sort
of twenty to forty times the mass of the
Sun range it's very interesting it feels
like all of the pieces are falling into
place
but obviously two data points does not
make a trend and so again it's a waiting
game to see if we can maybe spot any
more of these stars sort of winking out
of existence either in our own galaxy
using images or by studying the
signatures of light from other galaxies
that are dominated by these very
variables massive very luminous stars
and is a really exciting sort of Avenue
of research and I'm really looking
forward to seeing what comes out of it
now finally I want to end on something
really cool that's been announced today
while I'm filming so I've not quite had
chance to sort of digest everything yet
but it's a result that is going to play
into this so-called crisis in cosmology
and I covered this back in December at
night Sky News and if you haven't seen
that video I would maybe go back and
watch it just to understand everything
I'm about to say
so today the largest 3d map of the
universe ever created has been released
along with 20 journal articles
describing all the work that's been done
on it which total 500 pages hence why I
haven't
to digest everything properly yes so the
collaboration that's done this is the
EBUS team from the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey which is a telescope essentially
just surveys the sky every single night
and records the position of Biscay every
object that it sees and the EBUS team
have done is add to what's been
previously done Bala tell us there were
the past 20 years and it means 20 new
papers they describe how they targeted
two million galaxies and quasars over 11
billion years of the universe's history
so they've looked back 11 billion light
years and so we see what the universe
looked like all the way back when it was
only say 3 billion light years old such
a detailed map over such a large chunk
of time you know 80% of the universe's
history allows you to track the
universe's expansion from this they've
been able to pinpoint the exact moment
that the universe's expansion started
accelerating which was six billion years
ago caused by this unknown energy or
force that we've dubbed dark energy it's
obviously when it started to dominate
the universe is six billion years ago
now this is where this starts to play
into this crisis in cosmology because if
you have the rate of expansion then you
can also get the age of the universe and
if you've seen that previous video you
will know that lots of different methods
for measuring the rate of expansion in
the age of the universe give us
different answers and the things where
we measure locally from say supernovae
in distant galaxies compared to when we
measure it on a universal scale across
the entire universe using the echo from
the Big Bang a light sort of relic from
the Big Bang the Cosmic Microwave
Background they give two very different
results so much now that the errors on
those answers are also not overlapping
either this is sort of definitely two
different camps that they've fallen into
it's very interesting to see now what
the EBUS is collaborations measurement
of this will be and so for my first look
at this today the rate of expansion and
therefore the age of the universe that
they're deriving is actually much more
in agreement with the universe
so way of measuring this with the Cosmic
Microwave Background this echo of the
Big Bang which is very interesting
because the crisis in cosmology sort of
video discussed this as that may be the
difference in these two camps is because
there's a bias in either the data or the
Cosmic Microwave Background or the way
that we've been analyzing it or maybe
there's some systematic error that we're
just not aware of but the fact that this
result which covers both the local and
global scales is agreeing with the
Cosmic Microwave Background suggests
there might be some sort of unknown bias
in the local measurements instead the
other thing that this result is showing
is that the universe is very likely flat
they were talking about the geometry of
the universe here so not necessarily the
curvature of space by like general
activity and we're not talking about
like the shape of the universe ie like
the overall topology of it we're talking
about the geometry of space-time itself
like is space-time flat ie like wood two
parallel lines never meet or is face
time curved and therefore they would
meet or it's special go the other way in
which case they would never meet and the
crisis in cosmology paper that came out
in December suggested maybe we could
solve our problems in cosmology if the
universe isn't flat well that's sort of
threw everything off so it's interesting
to see that we can actually reconcile
sort of these two things not matching
even where the flat universe and saying
actually know the Cosmic Microwave
Background data and this sort of map of
the structure of the universe and maybe
starting to agree I know it's a lot to
take in is the age of the universe it's
the rate of expansion of the universe is
a big 3d map of the universe it's
pinpointing when dark energy first
started to dominate
it's okay to feel a little bit
overwhelmed at the minute I know I do
I'm still excited to jump into the sort
of 20 odd papers that they've published
as well today you know to really hear
from the scientists themselves what they
think are the big sort of scientific
consequences of all this data and these
results so if I find anything when I do
that I will report back next month until
then though hope I haven't fried your
brain too much with all this information
and until then happy comet hunting
everybody which meant that it was either
the lightest neutron star ever detected
or they're heavy wrong way around
wrong way raft the heaviest black hole
known before why I just want to say that
black holes are heavy I guess we talked
about in a previous night sky news video
at some point the heaviest the lightest
black hole ever discovered y ou which
means that it is either the lightest
neutron Jesus Christ Peggy but life is
going fine now lying goes in it I look
into your eyes and see the gravitational
waves that's the typical way we think
black holes are formed but that's mmm
excuse me I keep trying to do this outro
but battery's dying and my stomach keeps
reeling and interrupting all my thanks